In the last video,
you explored some of
the computational challenges of
training large language models.
Here you'll learn about
research that has
explored the relationship
between model size, training,
configuration and performance in
an effort to determine just
how big models need to be.
Remember, the goal during
pre-training is to
maximize the model's performance
of its learning objective,
which is minimizing the loss
when predicting tokens.
Two options you have to achieve
better performance are
increasing the size of
the dataset you
train your model on
and increasing the number of
parameters in your model.
In theory, you could
scale either of
both of these quantities
to improve performance.
However, another
issue to take into
consideration is your
compute budget which
includes factors like the
number of GPUs you have
access to and the
time you have available
for training models.
To help you understand some
of the discussion ahead,
let's first define a unit of
compute that quantifies
the required resources.
A petaFLOP per second day
is a measurement
of the number of
floating point
operations performed at
a rate of one
petaFLOP per second,
running for an entire day.
Note, one petaFLOP
corresponds to
one quadrillion floating
point operations per second.
When specifically thinking
about training transformers,
one petaFLOP per second
day is approximately
equivalent to eight
NVIDIA V100 GPUs,
operating at full efficiency
for one full day.
If you have a more
powerful processor that
can carry out more
operations at once,
then a petaFLOP per second
day requires fewer chips.
For example, two
NVIDIA A100 GPUs
give equivalent compute
to the eight V100 chips.
To give you an idea off
the scale of these
compute budgets,
this chart shows a comparison
off the petaFLOP per second days
required to pre-train
different variance
of Bert and Roberta,
which are both
encoder only models.
T5 and encoder-decoder
model and GPT-3,
which is a decoder only model.
The difference
between the models in
each family is the number
of parameters that were trained,
ranging from a few hundred
million for Bert base to
175 billion for the
largest GPT-3 variant.
Note that the y-axis
is logarithmic.
Each increment vertically
is a power of 10.
Here we see that T5 XL with
three billion
parameters required
close to 100 petaFLOP
per second days.
While the larger GPT-3 175
billion parameter model
required approximately 3,700
petaFLOP per second days.
This chart makes it clear
that a huge amount of
computers required to
train the largest models.
You can see that bigger models
take more compute resources to
train and generally also require
more data to achieve
good performance.
It turns out that they are
actually well-defined
relationships between
these three scaling choices.
Researchers have
explored the trade-offs
between training dataset size,
model size and compute budget.
Here's a figure from a paper by
researchers at OpenAI that
explores the impact of compute
budget on model performance.
The y-axis is the test loss,
which you can consider
as a proxy for
model performance where
smaller values are better.
The x-axis is the compute budget
in units of petaFLOP
per second days.
As you just saw, larger numbers
can be achieved by either
using more compute power or
training for longer or both.
Each thin blue line here shows
the model loss over a
single training run.
Looking at where
the loss starts to
decline more slowly
for each run,
reveals a clear
relationship between
the compute budget and
the model's performance.
This can be approximated by
a power-law relationship,
shown by this pink line.
A power law is a
mathematical relationship
between two variables,
where one is proportional to the
other raised to some power.
When plotted on a graph where
both axes are logarithmic,
power-law relationships
appear as straight lines.
The relationship here holds
as long as model size and
training dataset size don't
inhibit the training process.
Taken at face value,
this would suggest that
you can just increase
your compute budget to achieve
better model performance.
In practice however,
the compute resources you
have available for training will
generally be a hard
constraint set by
factors such as the hardware
you have access to,
the time available for training
and the financial
budget of the project.
If you hold your
compute budget fixed,
the two levers you have to
improve your model's
performance are
the size of the training dataset
and the number of
parameters in your model.
The OpenAI researchers found
that these two
quantities also show
a power-law relationship with
a test loss in the case where
the other two variables
are held fixed.
This is another figure
from the paper exploring
the impact of training dataset
size on model performance.
Here, the compute budget
and model size are held
fixed and the size of the
training dataset is vary.
The graph shows that as
the volume of training
data increases,
the performance of the
model continues to improve.
In the second graph,
the compute budget and
training dataset size
are held constant.
Models of varying numbers
of parameters are trained.
As the model increases in size,
the test loss decreases
indicating better performance.
At this point you
might be asking,
what's the ideal balance
between these three quantities?
Well, it turns out a lot
of people are interested
in this question.
Both research and
industry communities
have published a lot of
empirical data for pre-training
compute optimal models.
In a paper published in 2022,
a group of researchers
led by Jordan Hoffmann,
Sebastian Borgeaud
and Arthur Mensch
carried out a detailed study of
the performance of
language models of
various sizes and quantities
of training data.
The goal was to find the
optimal number of parameters
and volume of training data
for a given compute budget.
The author's name, the resulting
compute optimal
model, Chinchilla.
This paper is often referred
to as the Chinchilla paper.
Let's take a look at
some of their findings.
The Chinchilla paper hints that
many of the 100 billion
parameter large language models
like GPT-3 may actually
be over parameterized,
meaning they have
more parameters than
they need to achieve a
good understanding of
language and under trained
so that they would benefit from
seeing more training data.
The authors hypothesized that
smaller models may
be able to achieve
the same performance
as much larger ones
if they are trained
on larger datasets.
In this table, you can see
a selection of models along
with their size and information
about the dataset
they were trained on.
One important takeaway from
the Chinchilla paper is that
the optimal training
dataset size
for a given model is about
20 times larger than
the number of parameters
in the model.
Chinchilla was determined
to be compute optimal.
For a 70 billion
parameter model,
the ideal training
dataset contains 1.4
trillion tokens or 20 times
the number of parameters.
The last three models in
the table were trained on
datasets that are smaller
than the Chinchilla
optimal size.
These models may actually
be under trained.
In contrast, LLaMA
was trained on
a dataset size of
1.4 trillion tokens,
which is close to the
Chinchilla recommended number.
Another important result
from the paper is that the
compute optimal Chinchilla
model outperforms
non compute optimal
models such as
GPT-3 on a large range of
downstream evaluation tasks.
With the results of
the Chinchilla paper
in hand teams have
recently started to develop
smaller models that
achieved similar,
if not better results than
larger models that were
trained in a non-optimal way.
Moving forward, you can probably
expect to see a deviation
from the bigger is
always better trends of
the last few years as
more teams or developers like
you start to optimize
their model design.
The last model shown
on this slide,
Bloomberg GPT, is a
really interesting model.
It was trained in a compute
optimal way following
the Chinchilla loss
and so achieves
good performance with the size
of 50 billion parameters.
It's also an interesting
example of a situation where
pre-training a model
from scratch was
necessary to achieve
good task performance.
Let's move on to
the last video of
this week to discuss why.